Add elm workshop article. (#6)
Chefclub/tech.chefclub.tv: content/2019.04.getting-started-with-elm.rst

===========================================

Elm_ is a Web application development platform, providing a programming
language, a compiler, an architecture and tooling around. It focuses
on making sure your app state and the HTML that reflects it are always
in sync.

If you have been doing any frontend development during the last couple
of years, you might have seen that the JavaScript ecosystem is a bit
wild. Keeping up-to-date with the growing number of competing
frameworks can take a lot of energy, not to mention the challenge in
making sure your app works on all the available browser versions.

If you want to be able to write front-end application without having
to cope with the JavaScript fatigue, you should definitely try Elm_.

Elm brings functional programming to your browser. The language is
statically typed, so with Elm you won't see any runtime errors caused
by inconsistent typing. Being functional and pure, Elm let you write code
that is completely decoupled, which makes your code more reusable and
easier to refactor.

How is Elm different?
=====================

Most of the time, using Elm, the two lines it takes to load your app

> from the HTML file is all the JavaScript you will write, as your Elm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from the HTML file is all the JavaScript you need. Your Elm
```

> code will be compiled to JavaScript by the Elm compiler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
code is compiled to JavaScript by the Elm compiler.
```

Remove future tense

Most mistakes you make will be caught at compilation time, which
means that you will barely ever encounter exceptions at runtime in the

> browser. Also that means less unit tests and defensive programming to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
browser. Also, that means fewer unit tests and defensive programming to
```

write, which is always good.

Because there is a compilation step, Elm forces you to handle every
possible case of your model state. It makes sure you covered them on
the rendering side.

Also, the Elm compiler is *super* smart. It always does its best to
help you with meaningful messages, provides guidance to fix your types
and handle uncovered edge cases. It even finds your typos!

.. code-block:: bash

    Cannot find variable `nane`

    13|     hello ++ ", " ++ nane ++ "!"
                             ^^^^
    Maybe you want one of the following?

        name
        tan
        Cmd.none
        Sub.none

    Detected errors in 1 module.

The tooling is great. elm-live_ automatically updates the browser
code to reflect your code update in realtime. It comes with a debugger

> that will show you the list of events and state of your application at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that shows you the list of events and state of your application at
```

a given point in time — you can even go back in time and replay previous

> events. elm-format_ will also format your code automatically to avoid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
events. elm-format_ also formats your code automatically avoiding arguments
```

> fighting over coding styles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 over coding styles.
```

.. _npm: https://www.npmjs.com/

Looking for an IDE?
-------------------

Have a look at `Atom <https://atom.io/>`_. Combined with the
`appropriate extension <https://atom.io/packages/elm-format>`_, it will
run ``elm-format`` each time you save your file – which is super handy.

Take a moment to make sure your text editor is configured to work well
with Elm files.

Starting your first project
===========================

No need for boilerplate here, you can just start by running ``elm init``
to create the minimum ``elm.json`` file mandatory to start an app:

.. code-block:: bash

    ~/tutorial$ elm init

    Hello! Elm projects always start with an elm.json file. I can create them!

    Now you may be wondering, what will be in this file? How do I add Elm files to
    my project? How do I see it in the browser? How will my code grow? Do I need
    more directories? What about tests? Etc.

    Check out <https://elm-lang.org/0.19.0/init> for all the answers!

    Knowing all that, would you like me to create an elm.json file now? [Y/n]: 
    Okay, I created it. Now read that link!

You now have an ``elm.json`` file in your project as well as an empty

> ``src/`` directory where you will put your source files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``src/`` directory where you put your source files.
```

``elm.json`` is to Elm projects what ``package.json`` is to nodejs ones.

.. code-block:: bash

    ~/tutorial$ tree -L2
    ├── elm.json
    └── src

    1 directory, 1 file

Creating your first file
========================

To get started you can simply create a new file named ``src/Main.elm``

> with the following content:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:
```

.. code-block:: elm

    import Html
    main = Html.text "Hello world"

Elm benefits from a full featured module system, with a broad

> ecosystem of external packages available. ``Html`` is part of the core.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ecosystem of external packages available. ``Html`` ships with Elm, it is part of the core libs.
```
maybe ~ ?

If I want to create a ``div`` with a link it would look like this:

.. code-block:: elm

    module Main exposing (main)

    import Html exposing (..)
    import Html.Attributes exposing (..)

    main =
        div
            [ class "container" ]
            [ a
                [ href "http://www.servicedenuages.fr/" ]
                [ text "Blog" ]
            ]

We can also create a list of links in our div:

.. code-block:: elm

    module Main exposing (main)

    import Html exposing (..)
    import Html.Attributes exposing (..)

    main =
        div
            [ class "container" ]
            [ ul
                [ class "links" ]
                [ li
                    []
                    [ a
                        [ href "http://www.servicedenuages.fr/" ]
                        [ text "Blog" ]
                    ]
                , li
                    []
                    [ a
                        [ href "http://www.elm-lang.org/" ]
                        [ text "Elm lang" ]
                    ]
                ]
            ]

Adding some state
=================

Now that you know how to render your page in HTML, let's see how to

> write a program that handles events.

Reviewer: DOM events ?

Author: Nope, Elm events

The way Elm handles that is by having:

- a ``Model`` that keep the state of the app,

> - an ``update`` function that will handle all the app events and update

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- an ``update`` function that handles all the app events and updates
```

  the model state accordingly

> - a view function that will return the Virtual DOM that matches the state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- a view function that returns the Virtual DOM matching the state of the app
```

  every time it's updated.

For those who know Redux_, it has been heavily inspired by
Elm. Basically ``update`` is a reducer.

.. _Redux: http://redux.js.org/

The events and their parameters are defined in a ``Msg``.

In order to create our application that handle states, we can use the
``sandbox`` from the Browser package:

> 

Reviewer: Small sentence introducing about sandbox and a link to `see more` may be a good idea.

        | NewName String

    type alias Model =
        { name : String }

    main =
        Browser.sandbox { init = { name = "Rémy" }, view = view, update = update }

    update : Msg -> Model -> Model
    update msg model =
        case msg of
            Switch ->
                if model.name == "Rémy" then
                    { model | name = "Séverine" }
                else
                    { model | name = "Rémy" }

            NewName newName ->
                { model | name = newName }

    view : Model -> Html Msg
    view model =
        div []
            [ text "Hello "
            , a [ href "#", onClick Switch ] [ text model.name ]
            , br [] []
            , input
                [ onInput NewName
                , value model.name
                ]
                []
            ]

The ``NewName`` event will be emitted with the content of the input each time we type in it.

Conclusion
==========

That's about it. Now that you understand how the event update mechanism works and how
you can define functions, you know more than you think about Elm.

When in doubt, the package documentation is really useful: https://package.elm-lang.org/

> I hope you try it on your next project and enjoy Elm as much as we do.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I hope you give Elm a shot on your next project and enjoy Elm as much as we do @Chefclub.
```

Wait a minute, That's it? Do I really know everything? But you didn't

> tell me how I was supposed to handle HTTP requests yet!

Reviewer: 🤣

Handling HTTP requests
======================

> Fair enough, I remember I asked exactly this question when I was

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fair enough, I remember asking exactly this question when I was
```

introduced to Elm_.

Let's use the `photos collection`_ of `JSON Placeholder`_ to get a list of JSON objects.

.. _`photos collection`: https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/photos
.. _`JSON Placeholder`: https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/

> In order to do so we will use the `elm/http`_ library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to do so we use the `elm/http`_ library.
```

The expectJson_ tool is expecting a msg with a Result that can be
either a `Http.Error`_ or the decoded items.

.. _expectJson: https://package.elm-lang.org/packages/elm/http/latest/Http#expectJson
.. _`Http.Error`: https://package.elm-lang.org/packages/elm/http/latest/Http#Error

We can use ``type Msg = GotItems (Result Http.Error (List Photo))`` to
define the event.

Then we need to explain how we can build the Photo record from its
JSON representation by writing a decoder.

.. code-block:: elm

    import Json.Decode as Decode exposing (Decoder)
    import Http

    type Msg =
        GotItems (Result Http.Error (List Photo))

    type alias Photo =
        { id : Int
        , title : String
        , url : String
        , thumbnailUrl : String
        }

    decodePhoto : Decoder Photo
    decodePhoto =
       Decode.map4 Photo
         (Decode.field "id" Decode.int)
         (Decode.field "title" Decode.string)
         (Decode.field "url" Decode.string)
         (Decode.field "thumbnailUrl" Decode.string)

At this stage you might be wondering what is this ``map4`` thing and
why on Earth we would use a function with the number of field that we
want to decode.

> I am glad you are asking yourself this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I am glad you asked ;)
```

> To go back a little bit, there are two ways of creating a record:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's rewind a little bit, there are two ways of creating a record:
```

1. Using its constructor:

   .. code-block:: elm

       newPhoto : Photo
       newPhoto =
           Photo 2
               "Profile pic"
               "https://profile.nytimes.com/accounts/1.png"
               "https://profile.nytimes.com/accounts/thumbs/1.png"

2. By defining its fields:

   .. code-block:: elm

       newPhoto : Photo
       newPhoto =
           { id = 2
           , title = "Profile pic"
           , url = "https://profile.nytimes.com/accounts/1.png"
           , thumbnailUrl = "https://profile.nytimes.com/accounts/thumbs/1.png"
           }

Decoders are using the constructor way to create records.

Decoding JSON values into records using ``Decode.map#``
-------------------------------------------------------

> ``Decode.map#`` will decode each fields and then build a record using the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``Decode.map#`` decodes each fields and then build a record using the
```

constructor with each decoded values as a parameter. The position of
the decoded fields is important and should be the same as the type
alias definition.

Decoding JSON values into records using ``Decode.succeed``
----------------------------------------------------------

We can also create a record and use ``Decode.succeed`` to mark it as
a decoded value. That's what `NoRedInk/elm-json-decode-pipeline`_ is

> providing.

Reviewer: What does elm-json-decode-pipeline provides ?

Author: It provides an API but I will rephrase thanks.

.. _`NoRedInk/elm-json-decode-pipeline`: https://package.elm-lang.org/packages/NoRedInk/elm-json-decode-pipeline/latest/

Using this, we can use pipes to iteratively define how our record should look like:

.. code-block:: elm

   import Json.Decode as Decode exposing (Decoder)
   import Json.Decode.Pipeline exposing (required, optional, hardcoded)

    decodePhoto : Decoder Photo
    decodePhoto =
       Decode.succeed Photo
         |> required "id" Decode.int
         |> required "title" Decode.string
         |> required "url" Decode.string
         |> required "thumbnailUrl" Decode.string

Even if it means installing one more dependency to your project, I
would recommand using the later form that is more flexible when
iterating on or refactoring decoders.

Note that in that case field order is also important, this will
compose a decoder that in the end returns an object and in between
return partial decoding functions.

Handling the response
---------------------

> Once the response body has been decoded, elm will send a message with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the response body has been decoded, elm sends a message with
```

> Once the response body has been decoded, elm will send a message with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the response body has been decoded, elm sends a message with
```

> a result that will be handled by the update function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a result that is handled by the update function.
```

type of the value. In our case: ``Result Http.Error (List Photo)``

In our update function we need to handle both cases, when an error
occured and when the photos list was decoded successfully.

.. code-block:: elm

    update : Msg -> Model -> ( Model, Cmd Msg )
    update msg model =
        case msg of
            GotItems result ->
                case result of
                    Ok photos ->
                        ( { model | error = Nothing, photos = photos }, Cmd.none )
    
                    Err err ->
                        ( { model | error = Just <| errorToString err, photos = [] }, Cmd.none )
                

We can also write it a bit differently, which makes it more readable:

.. code-block:: elm

    update : Msg -> Model -> ( Model, Cmd Msg )
    update msg model =
        case msg of
            GotItems (Ok photos) ->
                ( { model | error = Nothing, photos = photos }, Cmd.none )
    
            GotItems (Err err) ->
                ( { model | error = Just <| errorToString err, photos = [] }, Cmd.none )

Showing the list of pictures
============================

Once we are able to fetch our list of photos, we might want to display

> it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
those pretty pictures.
```

> I invite you to have a look at the Ellie with the fully functionnal

Reviewer: Whats Ellie ?

version of the app: https://ellie-app.com/55LtWwHbhkPa1

The interesting part is the following:

.. code-block:: elm

    displayPhotos : List Photo -> Html Msg
    displayPhotos photos =
        List.take 100 photos
            |> List.map showPhoto
            |> div []

    showPhoto : Photo -> Html Msg
    showPhoto photo =
        a [ href photo.url, title photo.title ] [ img [ src photo.thumbnailUrl ] [] ]

`List.map`_ will take each photo of ``model.photos`` and create a
list of the results of the ``showPhoto`` function.

Because ``showPhoto`` returns a ``Html Msg``, ``List.map`` will return a list of
``Html Msg``. We can then use this result as a list of children to a ``div []``
element.

.. _`List.map`: https://package.elm-lang.org/packages/elm/core/latest/List#map

Conclusion
==========

> What's next ? Starting from here, you can grow your widget. At some

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What's next? Starting from here, you can grow your widget. At some
```

point you might want to create a Single Page App (SPA) and handle URL
with multiple pages.

> That's where the Elm Architecture start to be really useful. I would

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's where the Elm Architecture really starts to shine. I would
```

recommend you to have a look at `elm-kitchen`_ which will help you to get

> started with it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
started with the scaffolding.
```

?

.. _`elm-kitchen`: https://allo-media.github.io/elm-kitchen/

A word about Elm types and Elm records
======================================

Elm types
---------

In Elm everything has a type.

- ``"hello"`` is a ``String``
- ``4`` is a ``number``
- ``4.2`` is a ``Float``

> Elm itself define the usual types, however our business logic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Elm itself defines the usual types, however, our business logic
```

sometimes doesn't comply with the existing types.

Let's think about a user, it can be ``Active`` or ``Inactive``.

In other languages we would use an Enum, in Elm_ we can use a type.

.. code-block:: elm

    type Status = Active | Inactive

You might want to use a boolean for this specific case, however using

> a type here will make your code more readable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a type here does make your code more readable.
```

> The benefit of use a type is that Elm will be able to validate that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The benefit of use a type is that Elm is able to validate that
```

                    | todos = Todo model.currentInputValue :: model.todos
                    , currentInputValue = ""
                }
    
            UpdateTodoDescription value ->
                { model | currentInputValue = value }

Elm records and type alias
--------------------------

If we want to define a user, we will create a record_:

.. _record: https://elm-lang.org/docs/records

.. code-block:: elm

    { username = "Natim", status = Active }

The type annotation of this record can be deduced automatically by Elm_ and would be:

.. code-block:: elm

    { username : String, status : Status }

If I create functions that take a user, I would need to define what are the property of this user:

.. code-block:: elm

    getUserName :  { username : String, status : Status } -> String
    getUserName user =
        user.username

Instead of doing that, I can create a ``type alias`` to name the type
annotation of my record:

.. code-block:: elm

    type alias User =
         { username : String, status : Status }

    getUserName :  User -> String
    getUserName user =
        user.username

Because ``user.username`` and ``.username user`` are two acceptable

> way of accessing the username property of our user, we can simplify

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ways of accessing the username property of our user, we can simplify
```

our ``getUserName`` function like that:

.. code-block:: elm

    getUserName :  User -> String
    getUserName =
        .username

It is really likely that the state of our app would grow, that's why

> it is recommended to use a type alias for ``Model``.

Reviewer: Not sure I get the point here

Elm types, a step further
-------------------------

> Elm types can go a step further and we can create composite types, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Elm types can go a step further, let's look at composite types. The
```

standard library already provide a bunch of them.

For instance ``Maybe``, we can define maybe like that:

.. code-block:: elm

    type Maybe a = Just a | Nothing

You might have seen the lowercase ``a`` here.

> It is just to tell elm that it can be any types. The only thing that

Author: ```suggestion
It is just to tell Elm that it can be any types. The only thing that
```

matters is that the type defined should be the same as the type of the
parameter of Just.

``Maybe String`` will then be either a ``Just value`` with value of
type ``String`` or a ``Nothing``.
   
``Maybe Int`` will then be either a ``Just value`` with value of
type ``Int`` or a ``Nothing``.

We have the same thing with ``Result`` that can be defined like that:

.. code-block:: elm

    type Result a b = Err a | Ok b

> We can then define ``Result Http.Error String`` that will be either

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can then define ``Result Http.Error String`` that is either
```

``Ok value`` with ``value`` of type ``String`` or ``Err error`` with
``error`` of type ``Http.Error``

> What can blow your mind is to have complex types that are self-explanatory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What can blow your mind is to have complex types that are self-explanatory:
```

You mean in an impressed way or in a bad way?
reword.
